All right, what are the things you try to tell your students?
Yeah, I mean, obviously people have been studying books in America for a long time, so I sort of try to identify different traditions as trans.
And the three that I usually point to is, first of all, the amateur, using amateur both in the sense of non-professional but also in the French sense of people who are doing it out of birth.
I think that's really the tradition that Isaiah Thomas himself comes in.
Many people who themselves were in the book trades or book collectors or librarians gathered together and did a lot of scholarly work in the history of the book, although it tends to be very scattered and, you know, the quality can vary a lot.
The second tradition in America has been the bibliographical one, which, since World War II, has been heavily influenced by Fredson Bowers and his school bibliography, school in the sense of discipline, and was something that was based in the academy to a large degree and largely in the English department.
And...
also something that really accomplished a great deal.
The third is what people now sort of refer to as history of the book.
And this is a translation of the French term, and it has people think about history of the book.
It certainly was very heavily influenced by French theorists and scholars.
most notably Henri-Jean Martin and then Roger Chartier.
And it really, as they conceived the history of the book, they saw it as a kind of cultural history.
And looking at the ways in which books both act on and act in society,
I'm sorry, act in and act on society.
Okay.
That's quite a novel concept, isn't it?
Act on books, acting on society?
Well, it is and it isn't.
I mean, people sort of long believed that you can blame certain books for things.
I mean, the big question that in some ways is at the heart of a lot of the French work is,
you know, is it true that Voltaire and Rousseau caused the French Revolution with their writings?
And then the question becomes, if they did, how did that work?
Or if it didn't, why not?
Why is it that people often believe, you know, or, you know, that the anti-war protests were the result of the Rolling Stones?
You know, I mean,
That kind of sense that cultural products have social impacts is one that people sort of have a gut belief in.
But with modern, this modern disciplinary approach, a way to attempt to prove that, I guess, is to not only study the writings, but study how many copies were printed, who sold them, try and find out who read them, that kind of stuff, right?
Exactly.
I mean, look...
not look at the book as a kind of isolated product that just exists there, but see, try to use it as a way of getting into the various worlds in which created it, in which it was produced, and in which it circulated.
And in some ways, the history of the book
I like to think of it as having, you know, multiple disciplines because people can do history of the book and end up doing labor history, the lives of people who make books.
Or they can end up, you know, doing design history and the ways in which design features, fashions, and design changes over time.
I'm sorry.
Or whatever, yeah.
But you more or less came to this as a bibliographer, right?
How would you say you came to this?
Well, I was working at the Harvard Library on a bibliographical project.
Which was?
Which was Bibliography of American Literature.
Oh, of course.
Which is something, by the way, I want to talk to you about later, you know, for this.
Anyway, well, sort of one of the, I mean, I guess I always, one way of describing it is just institutionally what happened.
One of the big events for the history of the book in America was a 19, I think it was 80,
a Rare Books and Manuscript pre-conference.
I think I have the book right here, which is Books in Society and History.
And that was organized by Ken Carpenter.
And Ken used to frequently eat lunch.
My office at the Southern Library was sort of a lunchroom of people.
And we had a number of people who would come and eat lunch there.
That was your office?
That was my office, yeah.
And so a lot of things got traded around.
And one of the things that happened was Ken started talking about organizing this conference.
And so that was one of the times in which I sort of got involved with it.
And that conference was actually very important, not just for the... I mean, it was important in America because it brought a lot of foreign scholars over...
and people heard and met some of this last time.
Well, I also noted here that it's almost like a clarion call for scholars to do this.
Yeah, well, there is that statement, isn't there?
Yeah, there is, yeah.
Yeah, I think everyone's a little embarrassed after this.
But also, it turned out that many of those Europeans hadn't yet met each other.
I mean, I think that there's been a lot of work going on that people...
hadn't kind of put together before.
And so in many ways, I think that conference was a moment in which the idea that there might actually be something emerging, like a discipline, came out.
And it certainly reached out, I think, to a lot.
It was also sort of a public thing that it caught the attention of more people than just some of the scholars who've been working
So, and then if you could, and of course, Robert Darnton's books, which I happen to have four of them, they're remarkable.
He is really one of the leading, I guess, practitioners of this discipline, right?
Well, he certainly is kind of, I mean, both as a pioneering scholar and also as a very articulate scholar.
and a clear-headed scholar.
He's certainly one of the leading people.
It helps also that he writes excessively.
Yeah, exactly.
People really, I think he writes, and I've just recently read some essays, a brand new book from Princeton, you know, What's Happened to the Humanities.
I don't know if you're familiar with that.
It was just reviewed in the New York Times last week.
Oh, yeah, I did see that review.
So I called immediately and got a review copy, you know.
And, you know, some of this stuff is fascinating, but you can see why it's not going to... It probably will never sell more than 2,000 copies, you know.
There's almost this...
how do I put this, but you find people not really wanting to talk to a general readership.
But I find with Darnton's writing, with your writing, with David Hall's writing, there is this accessibility that is really very exciting to me, I guess.
Well, I mean, Darnton is a master, and I always say he's a master of the case study.
he finds that incident which he is able then to use to tease out.
But I would also, I mean, there's lots of bad, not bad, but sort of politics in it.
I would also say that Betty Eisenstein was very, very influential early on.
I have to get her books.
This is about, you're maybe about the ninth or tenth person to name her, you know?
I mean, what she did, I mean, I don't, I wasn't involved in the academic world enough to understand it, so I don't know.
But I don't think she's gotten the credit that she deserves.
Because what she did in her big book, The Printing Practice, Agent of Change,
was kind of produce a very solid historical monograph that no one could go up against.
And yes, there were mistakes in it, and people wouldn't, I think, agree with all of her interpretations today.
But I think the fact that she published it then really sort of added weight to the field.
It's kind of the opposite of Bob's work.
Bob's work tends to be essays, as you say, tends to be very accessible.
What would you say was singularly significant about that particular work of hers?
Well, just the erudition and amount of scholarship she puts into it.
And I think a real attempt to sustain a serious argument.
Where is she, by the way, do you know?
She's retired.
She lives in D.C.
She lives in D.C.?
Maybe she's somebody I ought to talk to at some point.
I like her.
Somewhere or another, I have her email address.
Let me see if it's here on my computer.
Anyway.
What's your email address?
If you don't mind.
I guess I don't have it here.
My email address is bal at... I like that, bal.
Well, that was in the old days when you could actually keep your email secret.
At ccwf... C-C-W-F?
Yeah, computation work facility.
Okay.
Dot computation center, cc...
Just CC.
Just CC, I'm sorry.
.utexas.edu.
Good.
Okay.
She said she made a real attempt to sustain a serious argument, I guess.
You know, Bob tends to write pieces that are about specific incidents or specific people.
And her book is really trying to...
make an argument about Western civilization, if you see the sort of difference in scope.
And obviously one of those is a much harder thing to sustain.
Yeah.
Her book must still be in print, right?
I'm sure it must be.
I'm sure I can get one at Waterstones.
Yeah.
Anyway.
There's a shorter version that she later produced, and that I'm sure is impressed.
I'm thinking for the bibliography of this thing, too.
I really want to make a very comprehensive bibliography, if I can.
Anyway, I'm sorry, we got off sidetrack there, but fascinating stuff.
So in terms of the American experience now, if we could sharpen the focus a little bit to what's going on here, here being the U.S., and how these seminars work into that and these various subjects.
Well, I think that, I mean, obviously the first...
Well, to a certain degree, the main people who started out doing history of the book were people who were historians of Europe, American historians, like Darden, a historian of France.
And in a sense, I mean, the key figure, of course, for American historians of America is David Hall.
And the AAF had, for a long time, of course, been doing, supporting its collections and its programs, you know, book history, in other sense, both bibliography and other kinds of history.
And they had a number of conferences you've probably seen or have during those conferences.
even one of which I think came before the Boston one, and which are not really part of the program.
But at some point, David, and I don't know, I don't know exactly how, suggested that they ought to actually form an official program.
And, you know, that,
in some sense wasn't necessary, but provided a letterhead and an excuse for the little newsletter they sent and certainly a way for raising money.
Yeah.
Probably was one of the more, you know, actually one of the more important advantages.
And the initial thing, of course, was that NEH launched the Needs and Opportunities Conference.
That came with 83, I think.
I'm typing here, Chad.
Typing and taping.
Excuse me.
How would you describe, would you call it still a discipline that's in its infancy, or do you think it's, where is it in terms of its maturity, and how would you judge some of the early work?
Personally, I tend to think it probably isn't a discipline.
Okay.
I mean, actually, and I think that the attempt to try and make it into one is not very interesting.
I think it's a group of people who have sort of a shared insight and interest, but that it's probably best characterized by diversity.
Hmm.
But I know that many people would disagree with that.
But it certainly is a different, if not a new way, but an expanded way of looking at things, isn't it?
And the fact that it is interdisciplinary, I mean, the formality of the rules have been relaxed considerably, haven't they, in terms of how you go about figuring out what happened?
Well, I mean, I don't know what that means.
I mean, I think that there has been some pretty amateurish work.
Which is always going to happen in the beginning of anything.
Which is always going to happen.
And I don't know.
Well, the thing that's amazing to me...
and I must say I was completely wrong, was the whole founding and emergence of SHARP.
And I, well, I remember very early on saying to Jonathan and Simon that really, did SHARP really need to exist?
My sense being that there were organizations already in place.
that could serve the same function.
And partly, I suppose, my misreading of it, and partly I think that those societies didn't take up the challenge.
But I had no idea that Sharpe was sort of virgin the way it was, and that there were so many
around the country that we're interested in.
I just heard about Sharp just within the last couple of months.
I mean, I'm slow coming to it.
But, you know, David Stamm at Syracuse?
Yeah.
He, you know, emailed me, like, out of nowhere, you know, and just liked my book and suggested something, and he was coming to Harvard for a weekend.
Let's get together for lunch, you know.
And that's how I found out about Sharp.
And all of a sudden, it is a pretty interesting tangent, doesn't it?
I mean, it's whether interesting or that's a subjective thing.
But I wondered, you know, how did Sharp emerge, you know, from this?
And I agree with you.
Why was it necessary for this specific group to... Well, I think it had...
Maybe it's a good excuse to travel to nice places and have conferences.
Well, that's crazy.
There's so many things about sharps that annoy me, but I've got to be very careful.
Yeah, don't worry.
I'm not going to embarrass you.
As you get to know me, you'll find out I really don't want to embarrass anybody.
What can I say?
I mean, it has to do with the geography.
Yeah, and I'm not quoting you on this.
Sharpe is not a focus of interest here.
It has to do with the geography of the U.S.
Actually, it has to do with two things, I think.
Well, the English side is different.
The English side really, I think, has to do with...
a sense that the bibliographical society and that kind of circle of people is an old boy network.
And that there were people sort of feeling that they needed some other kind of forum.
But in the States, I think it just had to do with geography.
That you have all these people in all of these universities and libraries all over the country who are feeling alone.
I'm the only person here that's interested in it.
And if the net hadn't emerged at the same time, I don't know that Sharp would have had the same impact.
That's interesting, isn't it?
It would have, to a certain extent, because its meetings and so on provided just a newsletter.
But email does really... The email and the listserv and the web page.
Just look at that Ex Libris page, the stuff that's on there now.
I have never subscribed to it.
I don't subscribe to it, but I do punch in every once in a while just to pick up things about what's going on.
And you can't keep up with it.
Now there are 20, 30 things coming on each day.
90% of it is pure nonsense, you know?
Exactly.
And I don't have the time to wade through that every day, you know?
And then once you get hopelessly behind, you're hopelessly behind.
And that's the end of that.
The concept was nice.
You know, I think that Sharp, and, you know, Sharp does that with its conferences, too.
You know, his conferences are completely sort of baggy and, you know, too many papers and so on.
Everybody almost gets to read their paper.
I once suggested that they actually we could just have an hour where everybody read their paper and then we could get on with the rest of the meeting.
Yeah.
Well, in fact, David actually suggested I go to this meeting in Cambridge.
And I said, gee, maybe I just had to get copies of the papers and I've got everything I need, you know.
I did not go.
I was in Paris instead.
No, I was at it.
Did you go?
Yeah.
Did you?
On what?
On Uncle Tom.
Ah.
Now, will they publish these?
Do you publish these on your own?
Well, that's another thing.
Sharp now wants to have an annual, or is going to have an annual, I shouldn't even say wants to, which means that the other thing, of course, Sharp was very cheap.
And now, of course, you basically, in order to support publishing a volume every year, you're going to have to raise up the dues and so on.
I think it's gone up to $35 a year or something.
Well, that's not too bad.
If the volume is pretty interesting, it's worth it.
Yeah.
I mean, to me, the best 50 bucks in the world is the Friends of the Harvard College Library.
I mean, the stuff that you get is just absolutely wonderful and unbelievable.
I mean, that's just a comment.
What else can I ask you for the...
A thrust of this new book, and it's awfully hard to explain, but it's this whole concept of book culture, you know, as we approach the, and I don't want to get into a hackneyed discussion of the new millennium and all that, but it certainly is coming at a time, isn't it, with all this digital stuff, and I've really been looking with great interest in going to Cornell, where they are.
actively involved in digitizing stuff and they are going to reduce by the year 2000 their holdings of 6.8 million books on campus to 5 million books.
You know, what's going to happen to those 2 million books and all this other stuff.
And then on the other hand, we have
this whole new discipline of history of the book with all the areas that you just touched on, what's going to happen to that?
Do you have, I mean, that's a pretty general question, and it's not for this Biblio piece, but it's something to think about.
Well, you know, I mean, I read that stuff, and I mean, okay, I mean, first of all, there's no question at all that with the electronic,
revolution or whatever you want to call it.
And one of the things I always note is, you know, which revolution is it compared to?
And people, you know, there's a whole range of the revolution in the printing press.
Photography.
Sure.
With this revolution, I mean, with this change, people's consciousness of what do I want to say?
The written word
is much higher people don't just sort of take it for granted at all anymore and i mean just practical ways i mean because of what people have to learn to run their computers people are much more knowledgeable about type type size and type styles so i think that certainly yes there must be a connection
between the fact that the media that we are using in our day-to-day lives is changing in our sort of interest in how media works in general.
I think, you know, I'm sure that's fueling it.
I mean, you know, as for the end of the book, I'm not worried about that.
I always like to think, you know, what if he took...
town like Austin or Worcester and decided that books were actually an evil thing and you actually had to get rid of them all.
I can't imagine any society that was organized enough to actually get, you know, if you think how far into your lives books have gotten in all the different ways, if you actually tried to get rid of them all, how difficult that would be.
Well, you're talking about get rid of them all as objects?
Yeah.
But I wonder if you even need a policy to do that.
You find it in a very informal and not organized manner, but you're finding that libraries are deaccessioning books.
They always have, but they're finding excuses now if they're brittle and they're too expensive to preserve.
And you are finding, and I think that with OCLC and other databases like that,
You're finding that a lot of places are getting rid of the same books, and that, you know... Oh, well, that's a different issue, and that's true.
And the problem is, it's not that we're going to not have any books.
The question is, are we going to have the books that we want to have?
Yeah.
That's right.
We're going to have plenty of books.
People who are sort of talking, you know... And I don't... Actually, I don't think I buy...
What's his name, the Gutenberg allergies?
No, Sven Burkitts.
Burkitts stuff either.
Though it is amazing.
I mean, people do behave differently on a computer.
I'm looking at it.
I'm looking at that, but I like to write with examples, which is why I've gone up to Cornell and I've gone up to the Harvard Depository, where they are...
They're building these things.
Two and a half million books you can get into each one of these modules.
At some point you'll have room for 20 million books out there.
They're saving them.
And as much as they can preserve them, they're preserving them.
But Cornell, on the other hand, is on a different track.
And then, of course, they put in figures like at the University of Michigan.
They have a factor.
If a book hasn't been used or called out in five years, that book is in danger.
They're actually applying, you know, when is the last time a book was used?
I know.
I'm seeing our library here die.
Really?
I mean, do you want to say that again?
Seeing this library here in Texas die.
How do you mean that?
I could go on at great length about this.
And I actually think, on thinking about it, I think it has to do with OCLC.
and pushing people towards using Library of Congress classifications.
What that did was it split people's collections.
Because our general collection used to be a Dewey.
And as soon as they, because of the new cataloging stuff, went to L.C., they couldn't shelve them together.
And what happened then is that people no longer had the feeling that when they bought a book that they were adding it to a pre-existing collection, taking its place.
in something that was bigger than the individual book uh-huh and so the the first thing happened is the lc collections just basically became as you say kind of turnover collections and then the dewey collections looked very strange old out of date and started being shipped out
And what do you mean by shipped out?
Is that a euphemism for a landfill?
It can mean almost anything.
We have a depository like Harvard's.
Not like Harvard's, but somewhat like Harvard's.
And a lot of stuff goes there, but basically that's just its first step towards the landfill because it becomes harder and harder to get access to it.
Both the cataloging and the
and it's no longer part of a whole collection.
Have you ever heard of a phrase, phased deterioration?
No.
That's an institutionalized phrase that I picked up at Cornell, and that's basically a determination
made of a book that they decide is brittle, is going to get more brittle, and then, of course, you reach a point of no return where you can't intervene and save it.
So that's basically the posture they're adopting at Cornell is that, you know, we'll keep it comfortable, but we'll do nothing heroic to keep it alive.
That makes sense to me for a lot of books.
I'm a firm believer in benign neglect as a great conservation technique.
Keeping it in good climate is important.
Very important.
But the next best thing to do is to just not do much with it.
Well, that's exactly what this phase deterioration is.
That's precisely, well, almost the definition of it.
The next best thing is, how did you say that again?
Do very little, do nothing with it.
Never touch it.
But somebody's certainly making a judgment on the content, right?
The next best thing is to do very little with it.
We're assuming that this is a book that somebody's made a judgment has very little intellectual value, right?
Well, I don't know what people are doing.
You can look at it many ways.
One way to look at it is that the real triumph is when a librarian buys a book that nobody's going to want for 30 years.
Because it's easy to know which books people will want tomorrow.
Do you want to hear how the prologue to my new book starts?
Sure.
It takes a minute, but when I was working feverishly on the proofs of Gentle Madness and I had to get them down to New York,
And I desperately needed to find a copy of the 1911 catalog to Samuel Pepys' library because it had the codicil to the will and they needed it.
And I was working off a Xerox from Modlin College, et cetera.
Harvard didn't have it or didn't have it on Hollis.
BPL doesn't have it.
I find it at the Boston Athenaeum, to make a long story short.
And as I'm checking it out,
Of course, they're still on the cards.
I'm the first person in 85 years to take out these books.
First time ever.
And so I make this really dumb statement, gee, 85 years.
Who did they buy these books for in the first place?
The gentleman whose name I have said, why, sir, we bought them for you.
And that'll be basically the prologue to my new book.
We bought them for you, sir.
And as you just, I mean, I got goose pimples when you said that.
If you could say it again, the real triumph for a librarian is to do what?
What did I say?
Well, it's on tape, but it was a wonderful comment.
You know, and I really think that, and you see, that's what I see from those Dewey Stacks.
I mean, they were building up their American poetry title by title, not just the new books as they came out, but filling in, you know, by reading them.
use bookstore catalogs and stuff.
The kind of way of thinking about their collection is just gone.
Well, but you do have librarians now who are using as a justification to
A word they're using at Harvard these days is groom, by the way, as opposed to weed.
I'm making a glossary of these phrases as I go by.
They're grooming.
They believe in grooming at Harvard.
And that's good.
But at Michigan in particular, I mean, if there's a five-year rule there, you know, and that's kind of scary, isn't it?
Yeah, it is for me.
Five years, my God, you know, I mean, you've got eight million books.
How can anybody possibly use every book that's in the library in a five-year period?
But at least it's cheap.
At least it's cheap, that's right.
You don't have to think.
Yeah, but to go back to that statement to which you said, I'm seeing this library die.
What do you mean by that?
I mean, I know you went off... Well, I guess I... Well, I love the quote.
Don't take it back, please.
Don't do that.
No, I just... And I don't think it's unique here.
It's just that one saw a vision for what the library did in the university.
lost.
And the library is, I mean, maybe doing another thing.
And I, you know, I think our library is doing some very good things.
You're not alone, as you point out, by the way, sir.
Oh, I know.
But that particular vision of, you know, really building a collection of books to support the curriculum and scholarship,
It's just not there.
And on the one hand, the new books that they're getting in are, you know, are inadequate.
And, of course, one of the things that happens is if you don't buy it when it's new, you almost, most of the time, you'll never get it.
That's right.
And that's certainly true with journals.
Mm-hmm.
Well, so many journals now are being published online.
Yeah.
So many aren't, though.
So many aren't.
And I do see some merit in the observation that you do a very specialized monograph.
that costs about $150 to buy.
It's published in an edition of 1,000 copies.
It's possibly going to be obsolete the day it appears in print.
Something like that almost should be online, you'd think.
That's fine by me.
I think people publish too much.
I once had this scheme that when you passed your doctoral exam, you would get a little coupon book.
and it would limit you to, say, a dozen articles and some books.
I love that.
And you would have to decide, okay, I want to use up one of my three books on this one.
It's like your frequent flyer miles.
And, of course, you could have an underground trade in them.
I mean, you know, there could be a market for them, too.
Someone who wasn't producing books could sell his to someone who wanted to produce four books and so on.
But I just think, I mean, I...
Certainly not opposed to... But you know all of the things that goes on there.
It's a question of tenure and the pressure for tenure and raises and all of that.
But what happens to this whole concept of history of the book?
You guys aren't going to go out of business for many years to come, to be sure.
But as books, I mean, as you are unable to determine variants and bindings and printing records and, you know, as things become, as there's no way to determine how many people are reading something off an Internet or something, what does that mean?
Is that something that will be lost, do you think?
as printing moves closer and closer to electronic printing?
I don't think so.
I mean, I think it will just raise different questions.
I mean, I always challenge my graduate students to figure out how to do bibliographical work with electronic text.
And, you know, you can.
Your hard disk is a physical medium, and your files on that hard disk are laid out in a certain way.
And by looking at the ways they're laid out, you can determine the order in which they were laid onto them.
I mean, you know, there are all kinds of things that one can do that's analogous to just straightforward analytical bibliography.
Well, I'm thinking about my book, which was written on a computer.
And, you know, this whole concept of, I mean, this is nonfiction, so who cares if this is a variant text or not?
But I have no idea how many drafts there were.
I mean, maybe some paragraphs might have been written 150 times.
There's no way of knowing until you print out a version.
That's certainly going to be lost.
You see manuscripts going into publishers now clean as a whistle.
No typos.
They've been spelt.
Publishers also say that they're longer.
They are longer, especially nonfiction books, because you can just add.
It's adding stuff as a snap, you know?
You can just, I mean, pagination is no longer a problem.
I remember the last time I said I'm not going to type a paper over just to correct it.
Yeah.
That's when I bought a computer.
No, yeah, things will change.
I mean, that's, but I don't, there's kinds of questions.
I mean, I think the history, the book,
is really a discussion about verbal communication.
I think that one of the reasons it's powerful is that... Actually, it's verbal communication in... How do I say this?
I'm sorry, I'm tripping up over myself.
It's not just the study of the communication, it's also the study of the sort of material forms that verbal communication takes place.
And I think that we will find that, you know, electronic communication has its material forms.
It's just that we're just not very used yet to talking or understanding them.
I think you're right, actually.
in ways we don't have a clue just yet, but there will be a way.
You're mentioning hard disks.
You know, some way is going to come along to divine how the hell this stuff is in there.
Well, you remember when the Microsoft files had corrupted pieces in them that you could read.
I mean, all that stuff, you know.
I think so.
Listen, we've chatted for a good while here.
And I hope I haven't.
No, it's good.
I've taken notes so I can use them for this Biblio piece, but then I've also recorded here.
And I'd love to continue this.
I'd really like to talk about, you know,
bibliography.
I'd love to do a chapter.
It's almost a challenge for myself to explain why and how the study of books is text.
How this can be a fascinating thing.
I think your work, for instance, on BAL is fascinating to me.
And I've done a couple of little interviews.
Have you heard of Audrey Hanneman out in the Midwest?
Remember, she did the Hemingway bibliography?
Oh, right, of course.
She never even graduated from high school.
And the book has probably sold over 30 years.
Princeton finally let it go out of print after 30 years.
I think it was 4,000.
And yet when you're talking modern first editions, they all mention Hanneman.
Well, anyway, that's a pretty interesting little story.
Maybe we can talk about just about bibliography and what it means in studies of books and stuff.
I'd love to talk about that with you.
Either when you come to Worcester, although you might be busy, or if you don't mind doing a telephoner like this,
Not particularly.
You don't mind doing a telephone?
No, not really.
Good.
Well, let me absorb this, if I may, and I'll give you a call and we can set something up.
Okay.
And thank you so much.
Well, thank you.
Appreciate it.
Bye-bye.